docs: `tgpu.resolve` (#724)
software-mansion/TypeGPU: apps/typegpu-docs/src/content/docs/fundamentals/resolve.mdx

---
title: Resolve
description: Resolve API can be used to extend shader code with WGSL definitions of TypeGPU-defined objects.
---

> Defining shader schemas and objects in JS/TS has lots of benefits, but for a while it meant introducing significant duplication between host and GPU code.
> In addition to that it was crucial to keep both sides in sync manually when making any changes.

Reviewer: Anybody can hop into this guide at random, so the concept of time ("for a while") can be confusing.
If it was meant to refer to prior versions of TypeGPU, imo these guides should be "timeless", meaning as if these features always existed.

```suggestion
Defining shader schemas and objects in JS/TS has lots of benefits, but having to keep them in sync with the corresponding WGSL code is hard to maintain.
```

> To mitigate this problem TypeGPU offers the **`tgpu.resolve`** API, which allows there to be just one source of truth,
> ensuring that the shader code is always up-to-date with the latest changes to the data schemas, bind group layouts and such. 
> It takes WGSL code and all the external objects it uses, but doesn't declare, and returns the complete necessary WGSL code, ready to be used as part of a *GPUShaderModule*.

Reviewer: Less is more 💜 🧘‍♂️ 
```suggestion
The `tgpu.resolve` API takes in a WGSL template, all TypeGPU schemas that you want to use in the shader, and generates a ready-to-use WGSL bundle.
```

:::note
`tgpu.resolve` is essentially a dedicated TypeGPU linker.
:::

Here's an example:
```ts
import tgpu from 'typegpu';
import * as d from 'typegpu/data';

const LightSource = d.struct({
  ambientColor: d.vec3f,
  intensity: d.f32,

> }).$name('Source');

Reviewer: Lets add more context, just so that devs know they do not have to name every structs.
```suggestion
}).$name('Source');
// ^ Giving the struct an explicit name
```

It can contain references to objects passed in the `externals` record.

## Externals

This is a record with TypeGPU objects that are to be included in the final resolved shader code. 
The values in the mapping are the objects themselves, while the keys are the names by which they are referenced in the template code.
Each object is resolved to its WGSL declaration, which is included in the final shader code.
Moreover each reference to the object in the template is replaced with the name used in its newly generated declaration.

If an object is being referenced only by another TypeGPU object in *externals*, it doesn't have to be included in the record.
Any passed-in object's dependencies are automatically resolved and included in the final result.

:::note
To resolve bindings you can access each entry of a [bindGroupLayout](/TypeGPU/fundamentals/bind-groups) via the `layout.bound` property.

```ts
  externals: {
    lightSource: layout.bound.lightSource,
    sampling: layout.bound.sampling,
    bgTexture: layout.bound.bgTexture,
  }

>   // can be shortened to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // As long as the names in the shader match the
  // layout keys, it can be shortened to:
```

>   externals: {
>     { ...layout.bound },
>   }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  externals: {
    ...layout.bound,
  }
```

```
:::

> ## Name registry

Reviewer: It's not as much of a name registry at this point, as it no longer stored the associations between objects and their names (the res ctx now does that), so its more of a name generator.

That being said, from the end user's perspective, this parameter would be more of a "naming scheme", as in how should the resolution process assign unique names to resources.
```suggestion
## Naming scheme
```

> When externals are being resolved, they are given new names based on the specified naming registry type (parameter `names`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When externals are being resolved, they are given new names based on the specified naming scheme (`names` parameter).
```

> The default naming schema is `random`. It uses labels assigned to the objects via *.$name* method or, if they aren't present, the keys in the *externals* record. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The default naming scheme is `"random"`. It uses labels assigned to the objects via `.$name("foo")` method or, if they aren't present, the keys in the *externals* record. 
```

In this mode labels are later transformed to match the allowed identifier pattern, as well as include some unique suffix to ensure that no identifiers conflict with each other. 

> Another allowed value of the parameter is `strict` which names resolved objects in the WGSL code exactly as they are labeled by the user in JS, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another allowed value of the parameter is `"strict"` which names resolved objects in the WGSL code exactly as they are labeled by the user in JS, 
```

> unless there is a name conflict, then a suffix is added. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
unless there is a name conflict, in which case a suffix is added. 
```
